THIS PROGRAM IS MADE POSSIBLE
BY THE FINANCIAL SUPPORT OF
AND BY GRANTS FROM:
CAPTIONING OF THIS PROGRAM
IS MADE POSSIBLE
BY THE JOHN D. AND CATHERINE T.
MacARTHUR FOUNDATION
( flute solo
of "Amazing Grace" )
( flute continues )
Woman:
* AMAZING GRACE *
* HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME. *
Woman:
THAT'S ONE SONG THAT GET
TO MOST EVERYBODY
IF YOU NOTICED IT.
IT'S A SONG THAT GET
TO THE HEART OF MEN.
* I ONCE WAS LOST
AND NOW I'M FOUND *
* I WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE. *
Woman:
I THINK IT'S THE WORDS REALLY.
A LOT OF THE TIME
THE MUSIC IS NICE
BUT THE WORDS GET MORE
WITH THE PEOPLE THAN ANYTHING.
( Judy Collins singing
"Amazing Grace" )
Collins:
I KNEW THIS SONG,
"AMAZING GRACE"
FROM PROBABLY BEFORE I CAN
REMEMBER HAVING KNOWN IT.
ONE DIDN'T THINK ABOUT HITS
IN THOSE DAYS
EVEN THOUGH I'M SURE
THERE WERE PEOPLE
WHO HAD TO THINK ABOUT
THAT SORT OF THING.
I DIDN'T THINK OF IT
AS SOMETHING WITH MASS APPEAL.
AND AS IT TURNED OUT
THAT WAS THE SONG
THAT PEOPLE STARTED TO PLAY.
IT WAS IN 1970, PEOPLE
STARTED TO REQUEST IT.
DISC JOCKEYS STARTED TO PLAY IT,
BECOMING VERY, VERY POPULAR
AND PEOPLE, I THINK,
TURNED TO IT
AS THOUGH IT WAS SOMETHING
THAT THEY'D ALREADY KNOWN
AND AS THOUGH THEIR MEMORIES
THEIR INNER MEMORY
WAS BEING REFRESHED
SO THAT THEY KNEW IT.
"AH, YES, I KNOW THAT."
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND BUT NOW I SEE. *
( playing "Amazing Grace" )
Ritchie:
I HAVE PEOPLE WHO SAY WHEN
I GET UP TO SING A FOLK SONG
AN OLD SONG FROM THE FAMILY
"THAT'S A QUAINT OLD THING.
THESE THINGS ARE
REALLY ALL DEAD."
I'D SAY THEY'RE NOT DEAD
OR THEY WOULDN'T BE HERE NOW.
THEY'VE LIVED ALL THESE YEARS.
THEY'VE GOT SOMETHING
TO OFFER TO PEOPLE
AND SO HAVE OUR FAMILY MEMORIES.
SEE THIS?
I WONDER WHO
THAT IS?
Man:
WE WERE ALL BOYS IN THE FAMILY
EXCEPT TEN.
THERE WAS MAY, OLLIE, MATTIE,
UNA, RAYMOND, KITTY, TRUMAN
PATTY, EDNA, JEWEL, PAULINE,
WILMER AND JEAN
AND I'M WILBUR.
THIS IS THE TENTH REUNION
THAT WE'VE HAD
AND WE'RE VERY FORTUNATE
THERE ARE SO MANY LEFT
THAT WE CAN SEE
ALL THESE GRANDCHILDREN.
Group:
* THE SUN REFUSED TO SHINE *
Woman:
THE LORD WHO SENT ME HERE BELOW.
Group:
* THE LORD WHO SENT ME... *
Wilbur:
WE USED TO SET ON THE FRONT
PORCH OF THIS OLD HOUSE
BEFORE IT WAS REMODELED.
WE HAD A SWING OUT THERE.
IN THE EVENINGS,
THEY WOULD SET AND SING
AND USUALLY THAT
WAS THE LAST SONG
THAT THEY SUNG--
"AMAZING GRACE."
MY MOTHER SANG IT, I REMEMBER
EVEN MY FATHER SINGING.
MY MOTHER BELONGED TO THE
OLD REGULAR BAPTIST CHURCH
AT JEFF, KENTUCKY
AND I REMEMBER WHEN
I WAS A LITTLE BOY
I WOULD GO WITH HER DOWN THERE
AND THEY WOULD
LINE OFF THE SONGS
AND I CAN REMEMBER SO WELL
THE PREACHER WOULD GET UP THERE
AND HE'D SAY, "AMAZING GRACE,
HOW SWEET ITS SOUND."
AND EVERYBODY WOULD SING
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
"THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME."
AND THEN THEY'D ALL COME OUT,
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME. *
"ONCE I WAS LOST
BUT NOW I'M FOUND," AND SO ON.
IT WENT ON THROUGH THE WHOLE
THING LIKE THAT.
IT WAS REALLY TOUCHING
FOR A YOUNG BOY.
IT MADE THE SHIVERS
RUN OVER YOU.
WE SANG IT EVERY TIME
WE WOULD SING HYMNS.
IN FACT, I REMEMBER AS A CHILD
MY COUSIN AND I TALKED
ABOUT THIS ONE TIME.
SHE TOLD ME,
"I USED TO HIDE IN THE CLOSET
WHEN THEY SANG THE HYMNS
BECAUSE I'D BE CRYING SO HARD."
I DO THE SAME THING.
EVERY TIME THEY START
SINGING THESE HYMNS
TEARS JUST START
COMING OUT OF MY EYES
AND I DON'T KNOW WHY.
IT JUST REALLY
AFFECTS ME SOME WAY.
IT'S LIKE ROOTS
JUST REACHING SO FAR DOWN.
* ...LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST *
* BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND BUT NOW I SEE. *
THE RITCHIES CAME OVER TO THIS
COUNTRY FROM SCOTLAND IN 1768.
I IMAGINE THIS SONG...
WAS IT WRITTEN AFTER THAT?
Moyers:
IT WAS WRITTEN
ABOUT THAT TIME.
YOU KNOW
WHO WROTE IT?
ISAAC NEWTON.
JOHN NEWTON.
I KNEW IT WAS A NEWTON.
KNOW ANYTHING
ABOUT HIM?
NO, I JUST SEEN
HIS NAME ON THE SONG.
( organ playing
"Amazing Grace" )
Choir:
* AMAZING GRACE
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND... *
Man:
JOHN NEWTON WAS IN HIS OWN WORDS
"AN INFIDEL AND A LIBERTINE"
IN THE EARLY PART OF HIS LIFE
BUT LATER ON HE WAS
A REFORMED CHARACTER
AND BECAME A CHRISTIAN MINISTER
IN THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
HE WAS BORN IN 1725
AND HE DIED IN 1807,
SO HE HAD A GOOD LIFE.
THE EARLY PART
OF HIS LIFE, THOUGH
WAS CLOUDED WITH
SHAME AND DISGRACE
ACCORDING TO HIS LATER THOUGHTS.
BUT HE WROTE THE HYMN
"AMAZING GRACE"
WHEN HE TOOK HIS FIRST CURE
IN THE PARISH OF OLNEY IN
THE COUNTY OF BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
HE PROBABLY WROTE IT IN
THE YEARS ABOUT 1760 TO 1770.
Man:
JOHN NEWTON WAS THE CURATE
HERE IN OLNEY.
HE WAS APPOINTED IN 1764
AND STARTED A VERY LIVELY
SORT OF PREACHING
ABOUT HIMSELF
AND HIS OWN EXPERIENCE
AND THE WORK OF GRACE
IN HIS LIFE.
IN ADDITION TO
THE CHURCH SERVICES
HE STARTED A WEEKLY
PRAYER MEETING.
AND HE PERSUADED
HIS FRIEND WILLIAM COWPER
WHO LATER BECAME
QUITE FAMOUS AS A POET
TO WRITE HYMNS TOGETHER WITH HIM
SO THEY WOULD TAKE TURNS
TO WRITE A NEW HYMN
FOR EACH OF THESE
WEEKLY MEETINGS.
"AMAZING GRACE"
WAS ONE OF THOSE.
AS FAR AS WE KNOW
IT WAS WRITTEN IN HIS STUDY
RIGHT AT THE TOP THERE
THE TOP RIGHT-HAND ROOM
OF THE VICARAGE.
John Newton:
OCTOBER 27, 1778.
HOW INDUSTRIOUSLY
IS SATAN SERVED.
I WAS FORMERLY ONE
OF HIS ACTIVE UNDERTEMPTERS
AND HAD MY INFLUENCE
BEEN EQUAL TO MY WISHES
I WOULD HAVE CARRIED
ALL THE HUMAN RACE WITH ME.
A COMMON DRUNKARD
OR PROFLIGATE
IS A PETTY SINNER
TO WHAT I WAS.
I HAD THE AMBITION OF A CAESAR
OR AN ALEXANDER
AND WANTED TO RANK
IN WICKEDNESS
AMONG THE FOREMOST
OF THE HUMAN RACE.
OH, TO GRACE,
HOW GREAT A DEBTOR.
"THOU SHALT REMEMBER
"THAT THOU WAST A BOND-MAN
IN THE LAND OF EGYPT
AND THE LORD THY GOD
REDEEMED THEE."
NEWTON'S BACKGROUND WAS
PRETTY ROUGH, REALLY.
HE CAME FROM A SEAFARING FAMILY.
HE LOST HIS MOTHER
AT AN EARLY AGE.
HE DIDN'T DO MUCH
AT SCHOOL AT ALL
BUT HIS FATHER EVENTUALLY
MANAGED TO GET HIM A JOB AT SEA
BUT HE RAN AWAY
AND THEN HE GOT PRESS-GANGED
INTO THE NAVY
AND THEN HE MUTINIED
FROM ANOTHER SHIP--
HE HAD A VERY ROUGH TIME--
AND THEN HE ENDED UP
IN THE SLAVE TRADE.
Cooke:
ONE OF HIS MAIN EXPERIENCES
WHEN HE WAS GIVEN THE COMMAND
OF A SHIP OUT OF LIVERPOOL
WAS TO TAKE MANUFACTURED ITEMS
FROM GREAT BRITAIN
AND EXPORT THEM TO WEST AFRICA
AND THERE HE WOULD EXCHANGE THEM
WITH THE TRADERS ON THE COAST
FOR SLAVES.
MONDAY NOVEMBER 12, 1750.
THIS MORNING MR. CLOUGH
SHOWED ME SEVEN SLAVES
OUT OF WHICH I PICKED FOUR,
THREE MEN, ONE WOMAN
PAID WHAT GOODS I HAD
IN THE BOAT THAT WERE SUITABLE
AND I'M TO SEND THE REST.
IN THE AFTERNOON,
WEIGHED WITH THE SEA BREEZE
AND RAN HALFWAY TO THE BANANAS,
THEN IT FELL CALM.
HE WAS A PROLIFIC WRITER
AND THAT'S MADE
ALL THE DIFFERENCE
TO OUR KNOWLEDGE OF HIM.
HE KEPT NOT ONLY A DAILY JOURNAL
WHICH HE WROTE EXTENSIVELY
BUT ALSO HIS WHOLE
VOLUME OF LETTERS
AND HISTORIANS TELL ME
THAT JOHN NEWTON'S
JOURNAL AND LETTERS
WERE THE FIRST REALLY
IMPORTANT ACCOUNT
OF WHAT IT WAS LIKE TO BE AT SEA
IN THE SLAVE TRADE BUSINESS.
MONDAY JANUARY 7, 1751.
THIS MORNING, WENT ON BOARD
CAPTAIN COBURN
HE HAVING TOLD ME
HE HAD EIGHT SLAVES
TO CHANGE WITH ME
FOR TEETH AND WOOD
ACCORDING TO OUR AGREEMENT
OF THE BANANAS
BUT COULD NOT TAKE THEM
UPON HIS TERMS
WHICH WAS 60 BARS
PER HEAD ROUND
THOUGH THERE WERE
BUT THREE SIZEABLE
AND TWO OF THE REMAINING FIVE
UNDER THREE FOOT, SIX INCHES.
SENT THE STEWARD
TO SHORE AGAIN
TO PURCHASE THE WOMAN SLAVE
AND BROUGHT HER OFF
IN THE EVENING, NUMBER 46.
SHE COST 63 BARS, THOUGH SHE
HAD A VERY BAD MOUTH.
Cooke:
HE OF COURSE HAD A FINANCIAL
INTEREST IN THE VOYAGE.
IF THE TRIP WAS SUCCESSFUL
AND HE MADE MONEY
THEN HE COULD TAKE
A SHARE OF IT.
THIS WAS PARTICULARLY
IMPORTANT TO HIM
BECAUSE HIS SWEETHEART'S PARENTS
WERE KEEN THAT HE BE
ESTABLISHED IN LIFE WITH MONEY
IN ORDER TO MARRY
THEIR ELDEST DAUGHTER
AND WITHOUT THAT MONEY
HE WAS DOOMED TO FAILURE.
USUALLY ABOUT TWO-THIRDS
OF A CARGO OF SLAVES ARE MALES.
WHEN 150 OR 200 STOUT MEN
TORN FROM THEIR NATIVE LAND
AND WHO OFTEN BRING
WITH THEM AN APPREHENSION
THEY ARE BOUGHT TO BE EATEN
WHEN THUS CIRCUMSTANCED,
IT IS NOT TO BE EXPECTED
THAT THEY WILL TAMELY RESIGN
THEMSELVES TO THEIR SITUATION.
IT IS ALWAYS TAKEN FOR GRANTED
THAT THEY WILL ATTEMPT
TO GAIN THEIR LIBERTY.
ACCORDINGLY, AS WE DARE
NOT TRUST THEM
WE RECEIVE THEM ON BOARD
FROM THE FIRST AS ENEMIES.
Burdon:
HE SAW HIMSELF VERY MUCH
AS A FREE THINKER
WHO WAS NOTORIOUS AMONG
THE SAILORS APPARENTLY--
WHO WERE A FAIRLY
ROUGH LOT THEN--
FOR THE TERRIBLE OATHS
THAT HE USED
AND THIS QUITE ALARMED THEM.
ONE DAY HE WAS IN THE ATLANTIC
IN A STORM AT SEA
AND IT SEEMED AS THOUGH
THE SHIP WAS SINKING
AND EVERYTHING WOULD BE LOST
AND HE SUDDENLY EXCLAIMED,
"WELL, IF NOTHING CAN BE DONE
LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US."
HE WENT BACK TO HIS CABIN AND
THOUGHT ABOUT WHAT HE HAD SAID
AND WHAT DID THIS MEAN,
"LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US"?
THIS WASN'T THE SORT OF THING
HE WAS SUPPOSED TO BELIEVE IN.
SOMEHOW HE REALIZED THAT THERE
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE STORM
GOD HAD ADDRESSED HIM,
THAT HE BELIEVED IN GOD
AND GOD'S GRACE WAS WORKING
ACTUALLY IN HIM AND FOR HIM
AND GRADUALLY HIS LIFE CHANGED.
Jessye Norman:
* AMAZING GRACE *
* HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE. *
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT TAUGHT
MY HEART TO FEAR *
* AND GRACE MY FEARS RELIEVED *
* HOW PRECIOUS DID
THAT GRACE APPEAR *
* THE HOUR I FIRST BELIEVED. *
Norman:
THE FIRST TIME I HEARD IT
MUST HAVE BEEN IN CHURCH.
THIS WAS WHAT CHURCH
MEANT TO ME-- THE MUSIC.
AND I'M SURE THAT IT
WAS DONE A CAPPELLA
AND IT WAS PROBABLY
DONE IN THE WAY
THAT WE REFER TO
IN THE BAPTIST CHURCH
THAT THE HYMN WAS "RAISED"
THAT SOME DEACON STOOD UP
JUST AS THEY WOULD
IN AN AFRICAN TRIBE
AND SAID, "I WANT TO SING
'AMAZING GRACE'
A HYMN IN COMMON METER."
AND HE STARTS TO SING
AND THEN THE CHURCH
JOINS IN.
DOES IT SURPRISE YOU
THAT THIS SONG
HAS NOW BECOME SO
UNIVERSALLY POPULAR?
YES.
AND RECOGNIZED AND RECEIVED?
YES, I AM
SURPRISED
BY THAT
AND I WAS SURPRISED
AT THE POPULARITY
THAT THE SONG SEEMED
TO GAIN IN THE '60s.
I WAS VERY SURPRISED BY THAT.
UNTIL THEN IT WAS
PRETTY WELL IN THE PROVINCE
OF RELIGIOUS FOLKS.
SOMEHOW THE GENIE GOT
OUT OF THE BOTTLE.
YEAH, IT REALLY DID,
AND IT STAYED THERE.
Collins:
FOR ME, IT WAS ALWAYS
THE SONG THAT GAVE ME
AN INNER EXPERIENCE
OF AN OTHER DIMENSION.
WHEN I SING THIS SONG
WITH A GROUP OF PEOPLE
I ALWAYS FEEL THAT
THERE'S A MYSTICAL TERRITORY
BETWEEN THE SINGER
AND THE AUDIENCE.
IT'S NOT JUST ME SINGING
IT'S SOMETHING ELSE
THAT'S SINGING
AND IT'S ALL OF THOSE PEOPLE
AND THEIR SPIRITS
SO SOMEWHERE OR OTHER THERE IS
SOME EXPERIENCE GOING ON
WHICH GIVES SOMETHING TO THEM
AND GIVES SOMETHING TO ME
THAT'S MORE THAN THE SUM
OF ANY OF US.
* ...HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
THAT SAVED THE...
I HAD HEARD THAT THE SONG
WAS WRITTEN BY A MAN
WHO HAD HAD A WRETCHED LIFE
AND BEEN A SLAVE TRADER.
WHAT AN EXPRESSION OF...
YES, OF GRATITUDE AND OF JOY
TO KNOW THAT THERE WAS...
IS THE OTHER SIDE TO THAT
WHICH CAN ONLY BE GIVEN
BY SUCH A PROFOUND
AND I WOULD CALL
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE.
"AMAZING GRACE" REALLY SAYS
THIS CHOICE IS WRETCHED
AND THIS OTHER ONE
IS WORLDS APART.
INDESCRIBABLE.
DID YOU EVER FEEL
LIKE A WRETCH?
OH, YES, ENOUGH SO
THAT IT ALWAYS REMINDS ME
THAT THERE HAVE BEEN THOSE VERY,
VERY DARK TIMES IN MY OWN LIFE
SOME OF WHICH, DURING SOME
OF WHICH, THIS SONG I THINK
REALLY CARRIED ME THROUGH.
"AMAZING GRACE" IS ALMOST
LIKE A TALISMAN.
WHAT WERE SOME OF THE DEEPEST
OR DARKEST DANGERS
THAT YOU EXPERIENCED
WHEN THIS
ILLUMINATION
WAS IMPORTANT?
I THINK IT WAS ALCOHOL
PERHAPS MOST OF ALL
BECAUSE DURING THOSE TIMES
PARTICULARLY
I THINK THAT SONG WAS THE THING
THAT WAS ABLE
TO PULL ME THROUGH.
IT HEALS.
* ...BUT NOW I SEE. *
BEAUTIFUL.
I REMEMBER BEING IN MISSISSIPPI
WITH FANNIE LOU HAMER
AND GOING ON THE VOTER
REGISTRATION DRIVES
IN THE SUMMER OF '64
AND WE'D GET TO THE TOWN
WHERE WE WERE TO DO A RALLY
FOR VOTER REGISTRATION
DREW, MISSISSIPPI
OR RULEVILLE, MISSISSIPPI
LITTLE TINY TOWNS
WHERE PEOPLE WERE REALLY
RISKING THEIR LIVES TO COME OUT
AND THEY WOULD COME.
THE THING THAT BROUGHT THEM OUT
WAS THE SINGING.
FANNIE LOU HAMER
WAS A GREAT SINGER
AND WHEN SHE WOULD SING
"AMAZING GRACE"
YOU COULDN'T HELP BUT SING
AND YOU COULDN'T HELP
BUT FEEL MOVED
AND YOU COULD EVEN SEE
THAT THE PEOPLE WHO WERE THERE
TO PERHAPS PREVENT
WHAT WAS GOING ON
EVEN THEY WERE INVOLVED.
YOU CAN'T HELP IT.
IT'S TERRIBLY IMPORTANT
TO HEAR YOUR OWN HEART
REFLECT THE HEARTS
OF OTHER PEOPLE
AND THE SONG I THINK FITS
ALMOST EVERY SITUATION
YOU WOULD PUT IT IN.
Marchers:
* BUT NOW I SEE. *
Norman:
I DIDN'T KNOW THAT THE MELODY
THAT WE KNOW IS AN
AMERICAN FOLK MELODY.
WE DON'T KNOW
HOW THIS CAME TO BE.
BUT IT'S INTERESTING--
THE LIFE OF JOHN NEWTON.
I FIND THIS QUITE UNBELIEVABLE,
THAT HE'D BEEN ABOARD SHIPS
WHERE SLAVES WERE TRANSPORTED
FROM WEST AFRICA TO ENGLAND
OR TO THE UNITED STATES
AND THAT HE FOUND GRACE
AND CHANGED HIS WAYS.
I MEAN, THIS IS AMAZING.
THE THING THAT I WAS
THINKING ABOUT
READING THE MATERIAL
IS THAT WOULDN'T IT BE
QUITE UNBELIEVABLE
IF THIS MELODY WERE
ORIGINALLY A SLAVE MELODY
AND THESE WORDS WERE
WRITTEN BY JOHN NEWTON?
WOULDN'T THAT BE AN
INCREDIBLE COINCIDENCE?
YOU'VE SUNG IT IN MANY PLACES.
I'VE SUNG IT WITH ORCHESTRA.
LAST SUMMER I SANG IT QUITE
A LOT AT THE END OF RECITALS.
THERE WAS A WONDERFUL CONCERT
IT WAS REALLY A ROCK CONCERT
FOR THE 70th BIRTHDAY
OF NELSON MANDELA
IN LONDON LAST JUNE
AND AT THE END OF THIS CONCERT
WHICH WENT ON FOR HOURS--
I THINK IT MUST HAVE BEEN
12 HOURS OF ROCK MUSIC--
THERE I WAS STANDING
IN A WHITE SPOTLIGHT AT THE END
WITH 70,000 ROCK FANS
THAT REALLY WANTED THE DIRE
STRAITS TO GO ON ONE MORE SONG
AND OUT I CAME TO SING
"AMAZING GRACE."
Moyers:
WAS THAT SPONTANEOUS?
Norman:
NO, I WAS ASKED TO DO IT.
I WASN'T SURE THAT
WAS A GOOD IDEA
AND A LOT OF THE ROCK FANS
DID NOT UNDERSTAND.
BUT AFTER A WHILE THEY FINALLY
QUIETED DOWN TO LISTEN
AND SOME OF THEM SANG WITH ME
AND THOUGHT THAT THEY WERE
FORCED TO REMEMBER
WHY THEY'D BEEN THERE
THAT IT WAS NOT
ONLY A ROCK CONCERT
IT WAS A REMEMBRANCE OF SOMEBODY
THAT WAS IN PRISON
FOR THE WRONG REASON.
* ...AND GRACE
MY FEARS RELIEVED *
* HOW PRECIOUS... *
THERE IS A POWER
OF RECONCILIATION
THAT TAKES PLACE WHEN I HEAR IT.
I DON'T KNOW WHETHER
IT'S THE TEXT
WHETHER WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THE LYRICS
WHEN WE SAY THAT
IT TOUCHES SO MANY PEOPLE
OR WHETHER IT'S THAT TUNE
THAT EVERYBODY KNOWS
AND EVEN THE MELODY
HAS CHANGED A LITTLE BIT.
WHEN I SING IT, I TRY TO SING IT
THE WAY IT WAS PUBLISHED
ABOUT 1900
BUT THE MELODY ITSELF HAS HAD
SOME VARIATIONS AS WELL.
THE WAY IT WAS
WRITTEN WE HAVE
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED... *
ALL OF THAT IS REALLY
QUITE STRAIGHT
BUT I THINK BY THE TIME,
IN THE '60s
WHEN JUDY COLLINS WAS DOING IT
IT TOOK ON AN EVEN MORE
LYRICAL QUALITY.
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME. *
ALL OF THESE LOVELY MOVING NOTES
IN BETWEEN THE ORIGINAL MELODY.
HAVE YOU EVER HEARD
ANY SHAPE NOTE SINGERS SING IT?
IT'S REALLY QUITE SOMETHING.
I CAN'T IMITATE THAT.
IT'S SOMETHING PRIMAL.
IT BECOMES SOMETHING
THAT'S REALLY COMING
FROM THE CENTER OF THE EARTH.
( Churchmembers singing )
( harmonized singing )
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME. *
Man:
I WOULD THINK THAT WHEN THEY
FIRST INTRODUCED "AMAZING GRACE"
THEY'D SING JUST LIKE
WE SING IT TODAY.
WE SING IT JUST LIKE IT WAS SUNG
WHEN IT WAS FIRST PUT
IN THE BOOK 150 YEARS AGO.
* ...BUT NOW I SEE. *
100 YEARS AGO,
JUST ABOUT ALL YOU HAD
THROUGH THIS WHOLE COUNTRY HERE
WAS SHAPE NOTES.
THERE WASN'T ANYTHING ELSE.
THERE WASN'T A LOT OF PEOPLE
DOWN IN RURAL SECTIONS OF
THE COUNTRY 150 YEARS AGO
AND WHEN YOU HAD
AN ALL-DAY SINGING
YOU'D JUST ABOUT GET THE WHOLE
TOWN AND THE WHOLE COMMUNITY.
"AMAZING GRACE" HAS BEEN
JUST ABOUT USED THE SAME WAY
SINCE THE START
OF PUTTING IT IN BOOKS.
THE SHAPES WASN'T INVENTED
UNTIL 1798 BY SMITH AND LITTLE.
THEY WROTE A BOOK AND THEY SAID
"FA" WILL BE TRIANGULAR
"SO" WILL BE ROUND,
"LA" WILL BE SQUARE
AND "ME" WILL BE DIAMOND SHAPED.
AND THEN THEY STARTED
SINGING SHAPED NOTES
ALL OVER THE COUNTRY
IN SINGING SCHOOLS
BECAUSE IT WAS THE EASIEST
METHOD IN THE WORLD
FOR BEGINNERS TO LEARN TO SING.
IF YOU PUT SEVEN ROUND
NOTES ON A SCALE
IT'S HARD TO GET
THE SOUND OF THEM
WITHOUT SOME KIND
OF INSTRUMENT TO HELP YOU.
HERE, YOU CAN START OUT
WITH YOUR FA-SO-LA-ME
YOU GO UP AND YOU'D FIND OUT
THE SOUND OF IT
AND TODAY WE STILL SING
THE SHAPES FIRST
BECAUSE THEY'VE BECOME
A TRADITION WITH US.
( group finishes singing )
EVERYBODY IS INVITED OUT
TO DINNER ON THE TABLE
AND IF YOU'VE GOT DINNER
THAT YOU WANT TO SPREAD WITH US
BE SURE TO SPREAD IT OUT WITH US
AND WE'LL HELP YOU EAT IT UP.
EVERYBODY DISMISSED
FOR ABOUT ONE HOUR.
THAT WAS A REAL GOOD APPROPRIATE
TIME FOR YOU TO SING THAT.
IT WAS REAL GOOD.
IT SURE WAS GOOD.
MY FAMILY ALWAYS SANG
IN SACRED HARP
AND I JUST GREW UP SINGING
SACRED HARP
AND I'VE BEEN COMING HERE SINCE
I CAN REMEMBER AS A SMALL CHILD.
WE COME TWICE A YEAR UP HERE.
WE HAVE ONE IN JUNE
AND THEN ONE IN NOVEMBER
BUT THEY'RE ALL OVER.
WE GO ABOUT EVERY SUNDAY.
I THINK IT'S THE FEELING
THAT YOU HAVE, THE TRADITION
AND IT'S TIED IN
WITH YOUR FAMILIES.
THERE'S A LOT OF GOOD MEMORIES.
BUT THEN, WE WORSHIP THE LORD
IN SONG, AND I LIKE THAT.
THEY SING "AMAZING GRACE"
A LOT IN THIS SINGING
AND ALL SINGINGS.
AND IT'S BEAUTIFUL EVERYWHERE.
Man:
IT'S JUST A GOOD SONG.
IT'S WROTE LIKE
IT'S SUPPOSED TO BE WROTE.
McGraw:
"AMAZING GRACE" IS NOT THE NAME
OF THE SONG IN OUR BOOK.
IT'S NAMED "NEW BRITAIN."
WE DON'T KNOW
WHERE THE TUNE COME FROM.
WE'VE COME TO THE CONCLUSION
THAT IT WAS A BALLAD
THAT WAS SUNG MANY,
MANY YEARS AGO
IN SOME OF THE OLD COUNTRIES
AND SOMEBODY HAS
TAKEN THE BALLAD
AND PUT THE WORDS OF
"AMAZING GRACE" TO IT.
IT'S MORE THAN JUST A SOUND,
IT'S THE FELLOWSHIP AND THE LOVE
THAT WE HAVE FOR ONE ANOTHER
THAT MAKES US SING OUR HEARTS
OUT FOR ONE ANOTHER.
( people singing
"Amazing Grace" )
McGraw:
THEY'S ANOTHER GROUP
THAT SINGS SHAPE NOTES
DOWN IN SOUTH ALABAMA
CALLED BLACK SACRED HEART.
THEY ACTLLY CALL THEIRSELF
THE "WIREGRASS SINGERS"
AND DEWEY WILLIAMS,
HE LEADS THE SINGING.
Man:
* WAS BLIND... BUT NOW... *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE. *
AND WHEN YOU WANT
TO SING IT ANOTHER WAY.
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE. *
THAT'S JUST AS TRUE AS THE DAY.
* THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES *
* I HAVE ALREADY COME *
* AH, AH, AH *
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT BROUGHT
ME SAFE THUS FAR... *
Williams:
I FEEL GOOD, AND
I CAN'T HELP IT.
WHEN I KEEP SINGING
"AMAZING GRACE"
IT JUST DO SOMETHING TO ME.
WE HERE
ON THE 91st
BIRTHDAY
OF DEWEY.
91 YEARS AGO, I DIDN'T
KNOW NOTHING
BUT I WAS HERE, THANK GOD,
AND I'M STILL HERE.
I'M GLAD TO BE HERE.
GLAD TO SEE
MY FRIENDS.
I'M GLAD
TO SEE ALL OF YOU.
DON'T YOU ALL FEEL PRETTY GOOD?
ALL OF YOU FEEL PRETTY GOOD
HOLD UP YOUR HAND.
AMEN, I SURE FEEL
PRETTY GOOD.
* IT'S TAKING JUST
A LITTLE MORE TIME *
* LORD, GIVE ME JUST
* SO MANY WRETCHED SOULS
ARE LOST IN SIN *
* SO MANY, MANY LEFT BEHIND *
* I GOT A LOT OF THINGS
THAT I NEED TO DO *
* BEFORE I LEAVE
THIS EARTH BEHIND *
* I'M READY WHEN YOU
CALL ME, LORD *
* GIVE ME JUST
A LITTLE MORE TIME. *
Williams:
I WAS BORN IN 1898,
MARCH THE 5th, ACROSS THE FIELD.
WHEN I WAS ABOUT SEVEN YEARS OLD
LIVING IN COFFEY COUNTY,
THEY'D HAVE NIGHT SINGINGS.
MY DADDY AND MY NEIGHBORS--
THEY WOULD SING
AND MY GRANDFATHER
WAS A SONGSTER
AND DADDY WAS A SONGSTER.
HE COULDN'T SING A LOT
OF SONGS LIKE I COULD
BUT THEY WERE SINGERS.
NOW THEY COULD RAISE ANY
KIND OF HYMN--
MY GRANDDADDY COULD--
COMMON ONES, LONG, SHORT.
HE'LL SING THEM ANY WAY
YOU WANT TO FIX IT
AND HE JUST SANG
THE SACRED HARP NOTE.
BUT HE REALLY COULDN'T
SING THEM LIKE I DO.
YOUR
GRANDDADDY?
THAT'S RIGHT.
WASN'T HE
A SLAVE?
YES, HE WAS.
I REMEMBER HIM.
HE DIED IN '28.
1928?
THAT'S WHEN HE DIED.
AND HE'D BEEN
A SLAVE?
YES, HE WAS A YOUNG BOY,
BUT HE COULD REMEMBER IT.
Woman:
"TO MY UNCLE ON HIS
91st BIRTHDAY.
"MAY I START BY SAYING,
GOD LOVES YOU, AND SO DO I.
"YOU HAVE REACHED A GOLDEN
MILESTONE IN YOUR LIFE.
"WHAT IS LIFE?
"LIFE IS A CHALLENGE, MEET IT.
"LIFE IS A JOURNEY, COMPLETE IT.
"LIFE IS A PROMISE, FULFILL IT.
"LIFE IS A BEAUTY, PRAISE IT.
"LIFE IS A STRUGGLE, FIGHT IT.
"LIFE IS A GOAL, ACHIEVE IT.
"LIFE IS A SORROW, OVERCOME IT.
"LIFE IS A TRAGEDY, FACE IT.
"LIFE IS A DUTY, PERFORM IT.
"LIFE IS A MYSTERY, UNFOLD IT.
"LIFE IS A SONG, SING IT.
"LIFE IS LOVE, LOVE IT.
"UNCLE DEWEY, YOU HAVE
DONE THIS IN YOUR LIFETIME
"WITH GOD'S HELP, AND THE LOVE
AND SUPPORT OF A FAMILY.
"HAVE A VERY HAPPY BIRTHDAY.
"I TRULY HOPE YOU HAVE
MANY, MANY MORE.
"WITH LOVE, CATHERINE CASEY,
MARCH 1989.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY."
* THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES *
* I HAVE ALREADY COME *
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT BROUGHT
ME SAFE THIS FAR *
* AND GRACE WILL LEAD ME HOME. *
AIN'T THAT WONDERFUL?
Moyers:
HOW DOES A MAN LIVE
A LIFE OF JOY?
Williams:
WELL, YOU GOT TO BE
BETWEEN POOR AND RICH.
THAT'S RIGHT--
THAT'S THE ONLY WAY
YOU CAN LIVE A HAPPY LIFE.
Moyers:
BETWEEN POOR AND RICH?
Williams:
YES.
IF YOU'RE TOO POOR,
YOU CAN'T LIVE HAPPY
AND IF YOU'RE TOO RICH,
YOU WON'T LIVE HAPPY.
NEITHER ONE OF THEM
IS EVER THAT CHEERY
IF THEY KNOW YOU'VE GOT
WORDS OR MONEY.
Woman:
YOU'LL SING?
I'LL HELP YOU.
NOT NOW, DEAR.
WE CUTTING PORK NOW.
YOU COULD SING
WHILE YOU CUT.
I MUST GET THIS WORK
DONE FIRST.
SING A LITTLE
BIT OF IT.
JUST WAIT, CHILD.
YOU NEED HELP WHEN YOU
SINGING THESE SONGS.
Woman:
* AMAZING GRACE *
( family echoing lines: )
* HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED... *
* A WRETCH... *
* SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE... *
* WAS LOST... *
* BUT NOW... *
* I'M FOUND... *
* WAS BLIND... *
* BUT NOW... *
* BLIND BUT NOW I SEE *
* THROUGH MANY... *
* DANGERS... *
* MANY DANGERS... *
* TOILS... *
* AND SNARES... *
* I HAVE... *
* ALREADY... *
* HAVE ALREADY COME *
* 'TWAS GRACE... *
* THAT BROUGHT... *
* ME SAFE... *
* THUS FAR... *
* AND GRACE... *
* WILL LEAD... *
* GRACE WILL LEAD ME HOME *
* OH, I'M SINGING
ABOUT AMAZING GRACE *
* AMAZING GRACE... *
* HOW SWEET... *
* THE SOUND... *
* THAT SAVED... *
* A WRETCH... *
* SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* OH, AND I ONCE... *
* I ONCE... *
* WAS LOST... *
* BUT NOW... *
* I'M FOUND... *
* WAS BLIND... *
* BUT NOW... *
* BLIND BUT NOW I SEE. *
IT'S A SONG THAT HAS
ALWAYS BEEN SUNG
BY BLACK PEOPLE IN CHURCH.
THAT'S WHERE I LEARNED
TO SING "AMAZING GRACE"
AND THEN BEING
AROUND MY GRANDFATHER.
"AMAZING GRACE" IS
LIKE THE THEME SONG
OF THE WIREGRASS
SACRED HARP SINGERS.
IT'S A SONG IN THE SOUTH
THAT YOU ALWAYS HEAR.
Moyers:
YOUR GRANDFATHER
IS DEWEY WILLIAMS?
YES.
AND HIS
GRANDPARENTS
WERE SLAVES?
UM-HMM.
Moyers:
WHAT DOES GRACE
MEAN TO YOU?
WELL, GRACE IS--
I'D SAY FORGIVEN.
Moyers:
HAS IT MADE
A DIFFERENCE
IN YOUR LIFE?
OH, YES-- ME, AND
MANY OTHER PEOPLE.
PROBABLY EVERYBODY ON EARTH,
BECAUSE WE ALL HUMAN
AND WE ALL DO DO THINGS
THAT WE SHOULD NOT DO.
I REMEMBER ONE DAY
MY BROTHER GOT VERY ANGRY
ABOUT WORKING SO HARD
IN THE FIELD
AND HE'D SAY HE WAS
QUITTING-- HE WAS LEAVING.
HE WAS NOT GOING
TO WORK ANYMORE.
TO PLOW ANY MORE MULE.
"I'M LEAVING HERE."
AND HE WENT ON UP
ACROSS THE FIELD
LIKE HE WAS GOING
AND MY FATHER SAY,
"HERE HE COME BACK
BECAUSE BETTER DAYS
ARE COMING BY AND BY."
HE GOT ALMOST TO THE ROAD,
TURNED AROUND AND CAME BACK
AND WENT TO WORKING AGAIN,
AND THAT'S WHAT GRACE...
MY FATHER KNEW THERE
WOULD BE A BETTER DAY
BECAUSE THE GRACE WOULD HELP US.
IF WE COULD JUST HAVE PATIENCE,
WE WOULD SEE A BETTER DAY.
ARE YOUNG PEOPLE TODAY
SINGING IT
CARRYING ON THE TRADITION?
Moyers:
THIS LITTLE GIRL?
YES.
LET'S HEAR HER
SING IT.
Woman:
RUTHENA, COME BACK.
Moyers:
CAN YOU SING
IT FOR US?
YOUR MOTHER SAYS YOU HAVE
A DIFFERENT RENDITION OF IT.
* AMAZING GRACE SHALL ALWAYS BE
MY, MY SONG OF PRAISE *
* FOR IT WAS GRACE
THAT BROUGHT MY LIBERTY *
* I DO NOT KNOW JUST
HOW HE CAME TO LOVE ME SO *
* HE LOOKED BEYOND ALL OF
MY FAULTS AND HE SAW MY NEEDS. *
DO YOU REMEMBER
SINGING TO YOUR
GRANDCHILDREN?
MANY TIMES.
YOU REMEMBER
HIM SINGING
"AMAZING GRACE?"
YES, THE OLD WAY.
WHEN I WAS
A LITTLE GIRL
I'D COME UP HERE
EVERY YEAR AND SIT DOWN
AND LISTEN TO HIM
SING THE NOTES.
WHAT WAS YOUR
FAVORITE VERSION
OF IT?
THE OLD WAY.
* WE'LL KNOW LESS DAYS
TO SING GOD'S PRAISE *
* THAN WHEN WE FIRST BEGUN *
( bebops to close )
THAT'S GOOD ENOUGH, AIN'T IT?
Johnny Cash:
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST, *
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE *
* IT WAS GRACE THAT TAUGHT
MY HEART TO FEAR *
* AND GRACE MY FEARS
RELIEVED... *
Cash:
THAT SONG HAS A VERY SIGNIFICANT
PERSONAL MEANING TO ME,
IN THAT MY BROTHER, JACK--
I RECORDED AN ALBUM
CALLED PRECIOUS MEMORIES
AND DEDICATED THE ALBUM TO HIM--
MY BROTHER JACK WAS KILLED
IN AN ACCIDENT IN 1944.
I LIVED IN DYESS, ARKANSAS--
D-Y-E-S-S.
IT WAS ONE OF PRESIDENT
ROOSEVELT'S NEW DEAL FARMS.
THE 14,00 ACRES WAS CUT UP
INTO 20-ACRE TRACKS
EACH WITH A HOUSE
AND A BARN AND A MULE.
I THINK PROBABLY
DURING THAT TIME
WHY THAT SONG DUG SO DEEP
WITHIN MY SOUL
WAS THAT MY MOTHER AND I,
AND MY SISTERS
SANG THAT SONG IN THE COTTON
FIELDS AFTER MY BROTHER DIED
AS WE WORKED.
DAVID ALLEN COE--
"JUST A FRIEND" HE SIGNS
HIMSELF, EX-CONVICT--
SAYS ON THE JACKET OF JOHNNY
CASH SINGS PRECIOUS MEMORIES.
"IT'S BEEN SAID HE"--
JOHNNY CASH-- "HAS
NEVER BEEN IN PRISON
"BUT IT'S AS IF
HE'S DONE MORE
TIME THAN I.
"EACH MAN HAS
HIS OWN PRISONS.
"PERHAPS HIS PRISONS
WEREN'T LIKE MINE
"BUT THEY LEFT
THEIR MARK ON HIM
"AS THE 20 YEARS
I SPENT LEFT MORE
MARKS ON ME
THAN THE TATOOS
ON MY BODY."
SO WE ALL HAVE
OUR PRISONS?
YEAH, WE DO.
WE CAN GET OURSELF
INTO A LITTLE PRISON
OF DRUGS, ALCOHOL,
A RELATIONSHIP, OR A HABIT
OR A SITUATION
THAT WE WEAVE OURSELVES INTO
THAT CAN BE LIKE A PRISON
WITH BARS THAT YOU CAN'T
BREAK OUT OF.
* AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET... *
Moyers:
DO YOU REFLECT ON
THAT FIRST TIME YOU SANG
AT THE HUNTSVILLE PRISON IN '57?
Cash:
OH, YEAH, I SURE DO.
THAT WAS MY FIRST PRISON
CONCERT AT HUNTSVILLE.
* I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW I'M FOUND... *
Cash:
FOR THAT THREE MINUTES
THAT SONG IS GOING ON
EVERYBODY IS FREE,
AND IT JUST FREES THE SPIRIT.
Prisoner:
* ...LIKE ME... *
* I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE. *
Man:
I'VE BEEN LOCKED UP
HALF MY LIFE.
I'VE SEEN AND DONE JUST ABOUT
ANYTHING YOU CAN IMAGINE.
I CAME IN HERE FOR THAT.
HOW MUCH LONGER
ARE YOU GOING
TO BE HERE?
WHO KNOWS?-- THAT'S IRRELEVANT
RIGHT NOW, ANYWAY.
I'M DEALING WITH DAY TO DAY.
I DON'T WORRY ABOUT
NEXT WEEK OR NEXT YEAR.
WHAT ARE YOU
IN HERE FOR?
MURDER, DRUGS, ARMED ROBBERY,
BURGLARY OF A HOUSE AT NIGHT
AND...
I WAS A REAL IDIOT.
ONCE IT STARTED,
IT WAS JUST
ONE THING
AFTER ANOTHER.
I ENDED UP IN A LOCKUP--
IN THAT SOLITARY OVER THERE
AND I WAS THINKING,
"BOY, YOU IDIOT," YOU KNOW.
YOU THOUGHT YOU WERE
SO SMART, YOU KNOW.
ALL THESE YEARS, MAN, YOU'VE
BEEN PLAYING IT SO CLEVER
AND THEN, YOU KNOW,
LOOK WHERE YOU'RE AT NOW.
YOU'RE NEVER GOING
TO GET OUT OF HERE.
YOU'RE NEVER
GETTING OUT OF HERE.
AND ALMOST
IMMEDIATELY
THE WORDS TO "AMAZING GRACE"
BECAME REAL TO ME.
I COULDN'T HARDLY
SING THAT SONG
AND GET THROUGH
FOUR VERSES OF IT
WITHOUT CHOKING UP.
I COULD GET THROUGH
ABOUT THE SECOND VERSE
AND I WOULD START
KIND OF LOCKING UP
AND A LOT OF TIMES,
ALL I COULD DO
IS JUST BE HUMMING AND CRYING
BECAUSE IT'S A REAL SONG
EVEN NOW TO ME.
IT HAS TO BE TAKEN
IN AN OVERALL VIEW
BUT PROBABLY THE MOST
FAVORITE LINES TO ME
THAT MEANS SOMETHING TO ME NOW
ARE THE SECOND VERSE
WHERE IT'S TALKING ABOUT
THAT GRACE CAUSED YOU TO FEAR
AND AT FIRST YOU THINK
THAT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE
BUT WHEN YOU COME IN HERE AND
YOU TAKE A LOOK, YOU DO FEAR.
YOU GET SO AFRAID
THAT YOU'RE NOT GOING
TO GET YOUR LIFE
IN ORDER IN TIME.
IT'S A FEAR THAT IS HARD
TO PUT INTO WORDS
OF BEING ALONE
OF BEING LOCKED IN
WHEN YOU'RE USED TO BEING FREE.
Moyers:
IN THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES,
AMAZING GRACE IS NO WAY OUT.
IT WON'T UNLOCK THOSE BARS.
Man:
NO, BUT THAT'S YOUR ONLY CHANCE.
THE ONLY WAY OUT IS UP.
Moyers:
SOME PEOPLE WILL
FIND IT DIFFICULT
TO BELIEVE THAT
HARDENED MEN
WOULD BE AFFECTED
BY SUCH A SONG
AND THEY'LL BE
VERY SKEPTICAL.
THEY'LL SAY,
"IT'S A RELIGIOUS SPASM.
IT'S NOTHING BUT PIETY,
NOTHING BUT SENTIMENT."
YOU KNOW, BILL, WE HAVE HAD
AN OPPORTUNITY AND A CHANCE
TO FACE OUR TRANSGRESSIONS.
WE HAVE A LOT OF TIME
TO THINK ABOUT IT.
WE'VE BEEN
RECONCILED.
WE HAVE
A PEACE INSIDE.
WH ARE YOU
IN HERE FOR?
I'M HERE FOR SOLICITATION
OF CAPITAL MURDER--
TRYING TO ARRANGE
FOR HAVING MY WIFE KILLED.
WHEN DID YOU
FIRST UNDERSTAND
THE MEANING OF
"AMAZING GRACE"?
THAT WAS IN NOVEMBER OF 1987
WHEN I GOT HERE.
( Moyers
laughs )
THIS IS WHY I CAN SPEAK
BECAUSE I WAS ONE
OF THESE CHURCH CROWDS
WHO'D NEVER REALIZED THE
TRUE MEANING OF "AMAZING GRACE."
I WAS HIDING
BEHIND IT.
I WAS
VERY INVOLVED
IN THE CHURCH.
I WAS A DEACON
IN THE BAPTIST CHURCH.
I SANG IN THE CHOIR...
AND YOU TRIED
TO HAVE YOUR
WIFE KILLED?
YES, I DID.
SO WHAT'S YOUR FAVORITE VERSE?
"THROUGH MANY TRIALS
AND TOILS AND SNARES
IT'S GRACE THAT'S BEEN VERY..."
THE THIRD VERSE.
THOSE WORDS IN THEMSELF
HOLD A STORY
FOR A GENERATION OF PEOPLE,
IF THEY'LL JUST LISTEN.
* ...HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* I ONCE WAS LOST, *
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE *
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT TAUGHT
MY HEART TO FEAR *
* AND GRACE MY FEARS RELIEVED *
* HOW PRECIOUS DID
THAT GRACE APPEAR *
* THE HOUR I FIRST BELIEVED. *
AS A SONGWRITER, YOU KNOW
WHAT I THINK ABOUT THAT SONG--
AS A SONGWRITER, OBJECTIVELY--
THERE IS A SONG WITH NO GUILE.
THOSE LYRICS ARE STRAIGHT AHEAD
HONEST, GUT LEVEL,
AND HEART LEVEL.
* ...BRIGHT SHINING AS THE SUN *
* WE'VE NO LESS DAYS
TO SING GOD'S PRAISE *
* THAN WHEN WE FIRST BEGUN. *
WHEN I SING THAT SONG
I COULD BE IN A DUNGEON
OR HAVE
CHAINS ALL OVER ME
BUT I'D BE FREE AS A BREEZE.
THERE ARE SOME SONGS THAT MAKE
A DIFFERENCE IN YOUR LIFE
AND THAT SONG MAKES
A DIFFERENCE.
( boys humming the scale )
Man:
IF YOU SEE ANY CHILD
WHO IS JUST PASSING TIME
MOST WOULD LIKE TO SING
OR LISTEN TO MUSIC
OR IN THIS DAY AND AGE,
RAP, SO THERE IS A...
THERE'S A CERTAIN MEANS OF
EXPRESSION THAT'S GOOD FOR THEM
AND THEY FEEL VERY GOOD
ABOUT THAT.
( humming continues )
IT'S A WAY TO EXPRESS,
TO COME FROM THE INNER SOUL
AND I THINK THAT THAT'S
VERY IMPORTANT.
Turnbull:
ALL THE WAY
FROM THE TOP.
SIT UP, IF YOU'RE
SITTING, OKAY?
( piano introduction )
( boys humming "Amazing Grace" )
IT'S STILL GOT TO BE ON PITCH,
TREBLES, WHEN YOU COME BACK
SO KEEP
THE SUPPORT UP
UNDER IT.
EVERYBODY, JUST
GENERALLY WARMER.
ALL RIGHT, SAME THING, PLEASE.
VERY LEGATO.
I'M THINKING CALM,
SMOOTH... MEDITIVE.
YOU KNOW?
READY, AND...
Turnbull:
IT SORT OF GOES BACK TO, I THINK
TO MY EXPERIENCES
AS A CHILD IN MISSISSIPPI--
I GREW UP IN GREENVILLE,
MISSISSIPPI.
I GOT A CHOIR SCHOLARSHIP
TO GO TO COLLEGE
WHICH WAS THE ONLY WAY
AND I SANG MY WAY
THROUGH COLLEGE.
BEING INVOLVED IN THE CHURCH
BEING INVOLVED IN CHOIR
ALL MY LIFE
I DECIDED TO GET
A GROUP OF KIDS TOGETHER.
BY THAT TIME,
I HAD BEGUN TO TEACH
IN THE NEW YORK CITY
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AS WELL
AND IT SORT OF ALL CAME TOGETHER
BECAUSE I FOUND THAT WORKING
WITH CHILDREN IN TERMS OF CHOIR
AND THEM FEELING GOOD
ABOUT THEMSELVES
REALLY MADE THEM DO
EXCITING THINGS OTHERWISE.
* ...I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE. *
Turnbull:
THERE'S NO
BREATH, PLEASE!
THAT'S NOT IT,
COME ON, THAT'S
NOT IT!
Boy:
WELL, THEY AUDITIONED
ME AT MY SCHOOL
AND OUT OF A LOT OF BOYS
IT WAS ONLY A GROUP
OF US THAT MADE IT
AND OUT OF THAT GROUP,
THEY CAME TO THE CHOIR EVERY DAY
AND SOME DAYS THEY PICKED US UP
BUT MOST OF THE BOYS
THAT CAME IN WITH ME QUIT.
I'M THE ONLY ONE
FROM MY SCHOOL THAT STAYED.
I WAS A LITTLE
TRAINING TROUBLE
BECAUSE I STILL WASN'T
INTO THE CHOIR THAT MUCH.
SO I WAS LIKE "AMAZING GRACE"--
I HEARD OF IT BUT I DIDN'T
REALLY UNDERSTAND IT
AND IT'S KIND OF HARD.
AT THE BEGINNING
OF "AMAZING GRACE"
THERE'S A LOT OF "OOHS"
AND YOU HAVE TO HAVE A LOT
OF BREATH SUPPORT-- KEEP IT UP
AND WHEN YOU KEEP YOUR MOUTH
IN THIS KIND OF POSITION
IT KIND OF HURTS
AROUND YOUR MOUTH
SO THAT'S WHY I SAY IT'S HARD.
WE USUALLY SING EVERY YEAR
AT AARON DAVIS HALL
AND THE FIRST TIME THE CHOIR
HAD JUST CAME IN FROM OFF A TOUR
AND WE WAS GOING TO MEET
THE PARENTS AT AARON DAVIS HALL
AND WHEN WE GOT INTO
THE POP SHOW AFTER THE CLASSICAL
WE CAME OUT AND WE STARTED
SINGING "AMAZING GRACE"
AND MY MOTHER STARTED
CRYING AFTER
AND I WAS LIKE, I SAID,
"MA, WHY ARE YOU CRYING?" RIGHT.
AND SHE SAID, "I'M NOT CRYING
BECAUSE NOTHING BAD HAPPENED."
SHE WAS CRYING BECAUSE
SHE WAS HAPPY AND JOYFUL
AND EVERYTHING LIKE THAT,
BECAUSE SHE SAID TO ME
THAT IT BRINGS BACK MEMORIES
FROM A LONG, LONG TIME AGO
SO I WAS HAPPY
TO SING IT FOR HER
AND ALL THE OTHER PEOPLE
IN THE AUDIENCE.
Turnbull:
"AMAZING GRACE" IS ONE
OF THE VERY POPULAR SONGS
IN OUR REPERTOIRE
AND WE'LL BE DOING IT IN JAPAN,
SINGING IT IN JAPAN.
NO-- CARRY THROUGH
"LORD," PLEASE!
PITCHES, AGAIN, PLEASE.
( piano plays )
ONE, TWO!
( boys resume singing )
Turnbull:
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
THAT IT PLAYS A ROLE IN THEIR
LIVES OTHER THAN JUST SINGING
BECAUSE THE SINGING IS
THE DISCIPLINE.
THE MUSIC IS THE DISCIPLINE
WHEREBY THE COMMON GOAL
THAT WE HAVE FOR THE KIDS
AND THEN FROM THAT,
THEY LEARN ALL KINDS OF THINGS
WHICH HELPS THEM IN THEIR LIFE.
WE HAVE SOME BOYS, MEN NOW,
WHO HAVE BECOME DOCTORS
LAWYERS, STOCKBROKERS,
TEACHERS, PREACHERS
AND THE COMMONNESS THROUGH THAT
IS THE DISCIPLINE
THE STICK-TO-IT-IVENESS
THE ABILITY TO SET A GOAL
AND REACH IT.
( boys shouting )
Boy:
I FEEL DIFFERENT FROM
THE REGULAR KIDS ON THE BLOCK
BECAUSE I'M GOING AWAY;
I'M GETTING TO SEE THINGS
THAT KIDS DON'T GET A CHANCE
TO SEE-- NOT MOST OF THEM.
I DON'T REALLY GET TO PLAY A LOT
BECAUSE I'M MOSTLY WITH
THE CHOIR SATURDAY AND SUNDAY
TRAVELING SOMEWHERE.
AND I JUST THINK I HAVE A
DIFFERENT LIFE THAN REGULAR KIDS
EXCEPT FOR THE KIDS
IN THE CHOIR.
I THINK WE ALL HAVE
THE SAME LIFE
BUT THE KIDS OUT ON THE STREET
DON'T THINK WE DO
HAVE THE SAME LIFE.
( plays a wrong note )
IF YOU WROTE THIS
FOR AN ORCHESTRA
WHAT INSTRUMENT
MIGHT PLAY THIS?
IT'S AN
INTRODUCTION, RIGHT?
PROBABLY TRUMPETS?
YEAH, SURE--
LIKE A FANFARE.
( mimics a trumpet )
OKAY, CAN YOU MAKE THE PIANO
SOUND MORE LIKE A TRUMPET
AT THE BEGINNING?
OKAY, I'LL TRY.
( short, rhythmic notes )
Boy:
THERE WAS ONE PERIOD OF TIME
WHEN I USED TO NOT COME.
I USED TO TELL MY MOTHER
I WAS GOING TO THE CHOIR
BUT I WOULD GO HOME AND SIT ON
THE STAIRS AND DO MY HOMEWORK.
THEN LIKE, AFTER THEY GOT
OUT OF REHEARSAL
THEN I'LL WAIT A WHILE,
AND THEN I'LL GO HOME.
I JUST-- WELL,
THEY GOT ON MY CASE.
I HAD TO TALK TO ONE
OF THE COUNSELORS.
THEY KNEW I WAS LYING,
KIND OF, LIKE
AND SO I CLEANED UP MY ACT
AND I STARTED COMING
AND I STARTED LIKING IT.
Woman:
HE MIGHT CALL IT PECULIAR.
HE MIGHT SAY THAT HE'S PECULIAR,
HE'S DIFFERENT THAN OTHER KIDS.
HE'S ALWAYS SAID THAT.
HE NEVER USED THE WORD "GRACE"
BECAUSE I GUESS AT TEN
HE CAN'T DEFINE THE FEELING,
BUT HE SAYS HE'S PECULIAR
AND I TELL HIM HE'S SPECIAL.
Boys Choir:
* THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES *
* TOILS AND SNARES *
* I HAVE ALREADY COME... *
Turnbull:
THEY HAVE TO BE PREPARED
TO TAKE THEIR RIGHTFUL PLACE
IN THE SOCIETY.
IT'S A COMBINATION
OF BEING IN TOUCH
WITH THEMSELVES SPIRITUALLY
AND IN TERMS OF FEELING
WHO THEY ARE
AND MUSIC CAN HELP US
TO DO THAT.
* ...WILL LEAD ME HOME. *
YOU'LL HAVE A SERIOUS
COLLECTION, JOSE.
MY MOTHER SAYS
SHE WANTS
TO SEE JAPAN...
Older Boy:
SHE WANTS
TO SEE JAPAN
THROUGH YOUR EYES?
SAY B.C.H... ONE, TWO, THREE.
B.C.H!!
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT
BROUGHT ME SAFE... *
WHY YOU LOOKING THAT WAY?
FOCUS THAT WAY!
Turnbull:
IN OTHER COUNTRIES
THEY USUALLY DO NOT UNDERSTAND
THE ORIGINS OF THE SONG
BUT IT HAS SUCH
A UNIVERSAL FLAVOR
AND JUST THE MELODY ITSELF
IS SO BEAUTIFUL.
THAT'S WHAT REALLY
CAPTURES PEOPLE.
GOT IT, GUYS?
Man:
GO DIRECTLY TO
THE DRESSING ROOM.
DO NOT STOP,
DO NOT PASS GO--
DIRECTLY TO
THE DRESSING ROOM.
PUT ON YOUR
BURGUNDY AND BLACK.
MEET UPSTAIRS BY 2:20.
NOT 2:25-- 2:20.
GOT IT?
Man:
THE ONLY STOP
THAT MAKES SENSE
IS TO STOP AND
GET YOUR BLAZER.
Turnbull:
THERE'S A DICHOTOMY
BETWEEN A BUNCH OF BLACK KIDS
SINGING "AMAZING GRACE"
OR LET'S SAY A BLACK CHURCH
GIVEN THE FACT
THAT THE PERSON WHO WROTE IT
WAS A HANDLER OF SLAVES,
AND WAS A CAPTAIN OF A SHIP
THAT CARRIED SLAVES
BACK AND FORTH.
BUT IT HAS SOME VERY DEEP
AND IMPORTANT WORDS
AND IMPORTANT MEANING
TO THOSE WORDS
THAT WE CAN ALL RELATE TO.
THOSE ARE THE KINDS OF THINGS
THAT MAKE IT UNIVERSAL
AS OPPOSED TO WHO
IT WAS WRITTEN BY.
DO YOU THINK GRACE IS REAL
TO THESE KIDS?--
THIS TRANSFORMING
POWER THAT CAN
CHANGE A LIFE.
I DON'T THINK THAT MOST KIDS
RECOGNIZE THAT YET.
BUT AT THE APPROPRIATE TIME,
THEY WILL REMEMBER.
* AMAZING GRACE... *
Boy:
IT FEELS LIKE WALKING
ON A BEACH
AND LIKE WIND IS HITTING ME
AND STUFF LIKE THAT--
THAT'S HOW I FEEL ABOUT IT.
NOT LIKE A ROUGH WIND,
LIKE A SOFT WIND
JUST COMING BY LIKE A BREEZE--
THAT'S WHAT I THINK
GRACE MEANS TO ME.
* ...TOILS AND SNARES *
* I HAVE ALREADY COME *
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT BROUGHT ME
SAFE THUS FAR *
* AND GRACE WILL LEAD ME HOME. *
THOUGHTS UPON THE AFRICAN
SLAVE TRADE, 1788.
I HOPE IT WILL ALWAYS BE
A SUBJECT OF HUMILIATING
REFLECTION TO ME
THAT I WAS ONCE
AN ACTIVE INSTRUMENT
IN A BUSINESS AT WHICH
MY HEART NOW SHUDDERS.
I FIRST SAW THE COAST OF GUINEA
IN THE YEAR 1745
AND TOOK MY LAST
LEAVE OF IT IN 1754.
I FITTED OUT
FOR A FOURTH VOYAGE
AND WAS UPON
THE POINT OF SAILING
WHEN I WAS ARRESTED
BY A SUDDEN ILLNESS
AND I RESIGNED THE SHIP
TO ANOTHER CAPTAIN.
THUS I WAS UNEXPECTEDLY FREED
FROM THIS DISAGREEABLE SERVICE.
DISAGREEABLE
I HAD LONG FOUND IT
BUT I THINK I SHOULD HAVE
QUITTED IT SOONER
HAD I CONSIDERED IT AS I DO
NOW TO BE UNLAWFUL AND WRONG.
BUT I NEVER HAD A SCRUPLE
UPON THIS HEAD AT THE TIME
NOR WAS SUCH A THOUGHT ONCE
SUGGESTED TO ME BY ANY FRIEND.
WHAT I DID, I DID IGNORANTLY
CONSIDERING IT
AS A LINE OF LIFE
WHICH DIVINE PROVIDENCE
HAD ALLOTTED ME
AND HAVING NO CONCERN
IN POINT OF CONSCIENCE
BUT TO TREAT THE SLAVES
WHILE UNDER MY CARE
WITH AS MUCH HUMANITY
AS A REGARD TO MY OWN
SAFETY WOULD ADMIT.
Burdon:
IT'S VERY HARD FOR US, I THINK,
TO UNDERSTAND THIS TODAY.
FOR SOME TIME AFTER HIS
CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY
HE CONTINUED IN THE SLAVE TRADE.
HE DIDN'T SEE ANYTHING
FUNDAMENTALLY WRONG WITH IT
AND IT WAS ONLY LATER IN LIFE
WHEN HE WAS IN CONTACT
WITH WILLIAM WILBURFORCE
THAT HE CAME OUT AS AN ADVOCATE
FOR ABOLISHING THE SLAVE TRADE
AND GAVE A GREAT DEAL OF
INFORMATION AND AMMUNITION
TO WILBURFORCE AND TO THE ROYAL
COMMISSION ON THE SLAVE TRADE.
AND IT WAS JUST BEFORE HE DIED
THAT THE ACT WENT
THROUGH PARLIAMENT.
WILLIAM WILBURFORCE, WHO WAS
LOOKING FOR A PURPOSE IN LIFE
LATCHED ONTO THIS CAUSE
AND HE TOOK IT UP
IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
AND FOUGHT FOR LEGISLATION
AGAINST SLAVERY
FOR MANY YEARS THEREAFTER.
BUT IT WAS MAINLY
THROUGH JOHN NEWTON
TALKING ABOUT HIS EXPERIENCE
OF THE SLAVE TRADE
THAT THE IMPORTANT AND
INFLUENTIAL PEOPLE IN LONDON
CAME TO REALIZE
THAT IT WAS NOT GOOD.
WITH OUR SHIPS, THE GREAT
OBJECT IS TO BE FULL.
THE CARGO OF A VESSEL OF
100 TONS OR A LITTLE MORE
IS CALCULATED TO PURCHASE
FROM 220 TO 250 SLAVES
FOR THE SLAVES LIE IN TWO ROWS,
ONE ABOVE THE OTHER
ON EACH SIDE OF THE SHIP
CLOSE TO EACH OTHER,
LIKE BOOKS UPON A SHELF.
I HAVE KNOWN THEM SO CLOSE
THAT THE SHELF WOULD NOT
EASILY CONTAIN ONE MORE
AND I HAVE KNOWN A WHITE MAN
SENT DOWN AMONG THE MEN
TO LAY THEM IN THESE ROWS
TO THE GREATEST ADVANTAGE
SO THAT AS LITTLE SPACE
AS POSSIBLE MIGHT BE LOST.
I WRITE FROM MEMORY, AFTER AN
INTERVAL OF MORE THAN 30 YEARS.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, I BELIEVE
MANY THINGS WHICH I SAW,
HEARD AND FELT
UPON THE COAST OF AFRICA
ARE SO DEEPLY
ENGRAVEN IN MY MEMORY
THAT I CAN HARDLY FORGET,
OR GREATLY MISTAKE THEM.
Cooke:
I ALWAYS THINK THAT THE LINE,
"SAV'D A WRETCH LIKE ME"
WAS NOT ONLY VERY TRUE
TO THE 18th CENTURY
WHEN THAT SORT OF LANGUAGE
WOULD HAVE BEEN USED
BUT HE REALLY SAW
HIMSELF AS A WRETCH.
THE WAY HE DESCRIBED HIMSELF
AS BEING "VILER THAN ANYTHING"
TIES IN WITH FEELINGS ABOUT
HIMSELF AS BEING A SINNER.
TO BE INSCRIBED UPON MY DEATH:
JOHN NEWTON, CLERK, ONCE
AN INFIDEL AND LIBERTINE
A SERVANT OF SLAVES IN AFRICA
WAS, BY THE RICH MERCY OF OUR
LORD AND SAVIOR, JESUS CHRIST
PRESERVED, RESTORED, PARDONED
AND APPOINTED
TO PREACH THE FAITH
HE HAD LONG LABORED TO DESTROY.
( piano playing
"Amazing Grace" )
Marion Williams:
AMAZING GRACE WAS NOT WRITTEN
TO GAIN MONEY.
IT WAS WRITTEN FROM THE SOUL.
YOU CAN SING THIS SONG
ANY STYLE.
* I WAS YOUNG *
* BUT I RECALL... *
THIS IS THE BLACK WAY
OF SINGING IT.
* SINGING SONGS... *
BLACK GOSPEL.
* WAS MY MOTHER'S JOY *
* AS THE SHADOWS GATHERED
AT THE CLOSE OF DAY *
* AS I SAT UPON HER KNEES *
* IN THOSE DAYS-- *
THERE WERE SOME GOOD DAYS--
* THAT USED TO BE *
* AS SHE SANG OF GOD'S
MERCY AND GRACE *
* A-A-AMA... *
* ...ZING *
* GRACE *
* HOW... HOW SWEET... *
* HOW SWEET,
HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* THAT SAVED
A WRETCH LIKE ME. *
* I ONCE WAS LOST, HALLELUJAH *
* BUT RIGHT NOW, RIGHT NOW,
RIGHT NOW, YEA, I'M FOUND *
* I... I WAS BLIND
BUT NOW I SEE. *
Ritchie:
WHEN I ASKED MY MOTHER
WHY THESE OLD SONGS WERE SO
SAD AND MOURNFUL SOUNDING--
THIS WAS WHEN I WAS
A LITTLE GIRL--
SHE SAID, "WELL, HONEY, THEY'RE
NOT SAD, THEY'RE REVERENT."
SHE SAID, "YOU GET SO MUCH
MORE JOY OUT OF A SONG
WHEN YOU RELISH THE NOTES
AND SAVOR THE TUNE."
Moyers:
WHAT IS IT
THAT HOLDS A FAMILY
LIKE THIS TOGETHER?
WELL, THAT'S HARD TO SAY.
IT'S MEMORIES, I THINK,
IT'S SHARED MEMORIES
SHARED REALITY, SHARED VALUES.
AND FOR US, IT'S THE SHARED
SONGS AND THE MUSIC
THAT REALLY DO STRIKE THOSE
CHORDS INSIDE OF EACH OF US.
Many voices:
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT TAUGHT
MY HEART TO FEAR... *
Woman:
EVERY YEAR DURING THE REUNION
WE GO UP ON THE LITTLE
COMMUNITY GRAVEYARD
WHICH IS ABOVE OUR HOUSE
AROUND A HILLSIDE.
AND KIND OF SHARE THE REUNION
WITH THE ONES THAT HAVE GONE ON.
MY SISTER UNA, WHO WAS BORN
IN 1900, DIED LAST YEAR
AND SHE IS BURIED UP THERE.
WE HAVEN'T HAD A MEMORIAL
SERVICE FOR HER YET.
* ...I FIRST BELIEVED. *
Woman:
THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES...
All:
* THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES *
I HAVE ALREADY COME...
* I HAVE ALREADY COME *
'TWAS GRACE THAT
LED ME SAFE THUS FAR...
* 'TWAS GRACE THAT
LED ME SAFE THUS FAR *
AND GRACE WILL LEAD ME HOME.
* AND GRACE WILL LEAD... *
Norman:
THERE'S A KIND OF WONDERFUL CALM
THAT I FEEL WHEN I SING THIS...
A KIND OF UNCOMPLICATED
FEELING.
I MEAN, THE WAY
ONE FELT AS A CHILD.
DO YOU HAVE A FAVORITE VERSE?
IF I HAD TO CHOOSE ONE,
I SUPPOSE I WOULD CHOOSE
"THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES"
BECAUSE IT HAS SUCH HOPE
AT THE END.
I'VE GOTTEN THIS FAR,
BECAUSE OF GRACE
AND GRACE WILL TAKE ME
THE REST OF THE WAY
HOWEVER LONG, OR THROUGH
WHATEVER DANGER...
WHATEVER COMPLEXITIES
I'LL HAVE TO GET THROUGH.
THE SAME THING THAT HAS
BROUGHT ME THIS FAR
IS GOING TO CARRY ME
THE REST OF THE WAY.
I LIKE THAT.
YOUR LIFE
SEEMS TO HAVE BEEN SO BLESSED
THAT IT'S HARD TO THINK
OF DANGERS, SNARES AND TOILS...
OH, BUT I'M AFRAID THOSE
THINGS ARE IN EVERY LIFE
WHATEVER IT MIGHT LOOK LIKE
FROM THE OUTSIDE.
THERE ARE MOMENTS WHEN IT IS
VERY DIFFICULT, I THINK
FOR MOST PEOPLE,
FOR WHATEVER REASONS
FOR REASONS OF OUR OWN CREATION,
IMAGINED THINGS, I DON'T KNOW--
BUT NOT EVERY MOMENT IS ONE OF
LIGHT AND ENERGY AND HAPPINESS.
* THROUGH MANY DANGERS,
TOILS AND SNARES *
* I HAVE ALREADY COME *
* 'TIS GRACE HATH BROUGHT ME
SAFE THUS FAR *
* AND GRACE WILL LEAD ME HOME. *
Moyers:
THERE'S A VERSE I HAD
NEVER HEARD OF BEFORE:
"WE LAY OUR GARMENTS BY...
UPON OUR BEDS
TO REST."
...BEDS TO REST."
YOU REMEMBER
THAT ONE?
MM-HMM.
I LOVE THAT LINE--
"THOUGH DEATH MAY SOON
DISROBE US ALL"
"OF WHAT WE NOW POSSESS."
YOU'D HEARD
THAT BEFORE?
OH, YES.
THOSE ARE NOT NEWTON'S VERSES.
NO.
A HYMN TAKES ON
A LIFE OF ITS OWN.
OH, IT DOES.
IT SHOWS WHAT A WONDERFUL
THING THIS IS.
IT IS SOMEHOW,
IT'S MORE THAN A SONG--
THAT PEOPLE WOULD STILL
GO ON WRITING VERSES
FOR THIS MELODY.
IT'S KIND OF AMAZING.
OUT OF THEIR LIFE.
EXACTLY.
AMAZING GRACE!
HOW SWEET THE SOUND
THAT SAVED A WRETCH LIKE ME.
I ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW AM FOUND
WAS BLIND, BUT NOW I SEE.
'TWAS GRACE THAT TAUGHT
MY HEART TO FEAR
AND GRACE MY FEARS RELIEVED...
( drum and organ intro )
* TALKING ABOUT
AMA-AMAZING GRACE *
* HOW...
* HOW SWEET, HOW
SWEET THE SOUND *
* SAVED...
* THAT SAVED
A WRETCH... *
* A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* SAVED A WRETCH
LIKE ME *
* YEAH, I ONCE... *
* I ONCE, I ONCE...
* ONCE WAS LOST,
BUT NOW... *
* BUT NOW, BUT NOW... *
* BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* I WAS BLIND... *
* WAS BLIND... *
* BUT NOW... *
* I... *
* BUT NOW I SEE *
* YEAH, AMAZING... *
* AMAZING GRACE *
* HOW SWEET THE SOUND *
* DID IT SAVE YOU ONE DAY? *
* AND YOU, AND YOU? *
* SAVED A WRETCH
LIKE ME *
* YEAH, I ONCE WAS LOST *
* HEY, BUT NOW... *
* BUT NOW, BUT
NOW I'M FOUND *
* I WAS BLIND... *
* WAS BLIND... *
* BUT NOW I SEE *
* YIEE, THROUGH MANY *
* THROUGH MANY
DANGERS... *
* MANY DANGERS, TOILS AND... *
* DANGERS, TOILS AND SNARES *
* I HAVE
ALREADY COME *
* READY COME *
* HAVE ALREADY
COME *
* WOO, WOO-OOH! *
* IT BROUGHT ME SAFE THUS FAR *
* SAFE THUS FAR... *
* AND GRACE... *
* GONNA LEAD... *
* WILL LEAD... *
* GRACE WILL LEAD ME HOME *
* YEAH, TALKING ABOUT
AMA-AMAZING GRACE *
* YEAH, HOW SWEET... *
* HOW SWEET,
HOW SWEET... *
* SWEET THE SOUND THAT SAVED *
* THAT SAVED
A WRETCH... *
* A WRETCH LIKE ME *
* SAVED A WRETCH
LIKE ME *
* YEAH, I ONCE... *
* I ONCE... *
* WAS LOST... *
* BUT NOW I'M FOUND *
* BUT NOW
I'M FOUND *
* I WAS BLIND *
* BUT NOW I SEE *
* WAS BLIND
BUT NOW I SEE. *
THAT'S A BEAUTIFUL SONG.
Captioned by
The Caption Center
WGBH Educational Foundation
CAPTIONS COPYRIGHT
PUBLIC AFFAIRS TELEVISION, INC.
THIS PROGRAM HAS BEEN
MADE POSSIBLE
BY THE FINANCIAL SUPPORT OF
AND BY GRANTS FROM: